# GEPNet: Granularity-Edge Perception Feature Learning Network for 3D PET Segmentation
Positron emission tomography (PET) images reveal metabolic activities at the cellular level and play a crucial role in detecting microscopic lesions and assessing prognosis. However, the intra-slice and inter-slice semantic sparsity of 3D PET images poses a great challenge for developing PET segmentation algorithms. To address this problem, we propose a Granularity-Edge Perception Feature Learning Network (GEPNet) for lesion detection and smooth segmentation under semantic sparsity. GEPNet contains Granularity-Aware Downsampling Module (GADM), Aggregation-Driven Lesion Attention (ADLA) module, and Spatial-Channel Adaptive Fusion (SCAF) module. Specifically, to preserve and associate semantic details, GADM retains fine-grained information from original slices by multiple down-sampling branches to minimize semantic loss. The ADLA module introduces aggregation operations within the attention mechanism to effectively capture intra-slice semantic features and establish correlations across inter-slice. Furthermore, the SCAF module adaptively fuses multi-scale local feature maps based on lesion global information to refine lesion detection and capture edge texture features. Finally,  we retrospectively compile the Mantle Cell Lymphoma PET Imaging Diagnosis (MCLID) dataset, comprising 176 patient cases collected from multiple central hospitals. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GEPNet significantly improves segmentation performance on the ECPC-ID, Hecktor 2022, and MCLID datasets. GEPNet excels in detecting small lesions and accurately delineating lesion boundaries, effectively balancing computational efficiency with high segmentation accuracy.
